In this slide, we are going to talk about Java Enums.

An enum, which is short for enumeration, is a special data type in Java that is used to define a fixed set of constants. Instead of using regular variables or strings to represent specific values, enums allow developers to create a predefined list of allowed values.

In Java, enums are actually part of the language syntax. They define a new type, just like classes, integers, or strings. Because of this, enums are considered a special reference type.

The main purpose of enums is to make programs safer, cleaner, and easier to understand. When you use enums, you restrict a variable so that it can only take one of the predefined values. This prevents many common programming errors.

For example, imagine you want to represent different levels of importance in a program. Instead of using numbers or strings, you can define an enum like this.

We create an enum called Level, and inside it we define three constants: LOW, MEDIUM, and HIGH.

After defining the enum, Java automatically creates constant objects for each of these values.

Then we can use the enum in our program. For instance, we can declare a variable of type Level, and assign one of the allowed values such as Level.MEDIUM.

Finally, when we print this value, Java will display the constant name.

Now you might wonder why we should use enums instead of simple strings.

Let’s say we write a program using a string like this:

String day equals "MONDA".

This code will compile successfully, but it contains a mistake. The correct spelling should be MONDAY, but the compiler cannot detect this error because strings allow any text.

However, if we use enums instead, the compiler will only allow the values that are defined in the enum.

So if we write something like MONDA, the compiler immediately produces an error.

This means enums provide compile-time safety, preventing invalid values before the program even runs.

In summary, enums are a powerful feature in Java that help developers define fixed sets of values, improve type safety, and make code more readable and maintainable.