In this slide, we are going to talk about Java Basic Syntax.

Basic Syntax defines the fundamental rules and structure required to write and execute a Java program.
If we think of programming like speaking a language, syntax is the grammar of that language.
Without grammar, communication becomes impossible.
Without syntax, code cannot run.

So what does Java Basic Syntax actually include?

First, everything in Java is written inside a class.
Java is an object-oriented programming language, and every piece of executable code must belong to a class.
There is no standalone function like in some other languages.

Second, execution starts from the main method.
The Java Virtual Machine looks specifically for this method:

public static void main(String[] args)

This method is the entry point of every Java application.
When the program starts, this method runs first.

Third, statements in Java end with a semicolon.
Every instruction you write must end with a semicolon.
If you forget it, the compiler will throw an error.

Fourth, curly braces define code blocks.
Opening and closing braces determine where a block of code begins and ends.
They are essential for defining classes, methods, loops, and conditional structures.

And finally, Java is case-sensitive.
This means that “Main” and “main” are completely different.
“System” and “system” are not the same.
Even a small letter mistake can break your program.

Now let’s understand how a Java program actually runs.

Program starts.
The class is loaded into memory.
Then the main method executes.
Statements inside the main method run one by one.
And finally, the program ends.

On the right side, we see a simple example

Here, we define a public class named BasicSyntax.
Inside it, we define the main method.
And inside the main method, we print a message to the console.

When this program runs, it simply prints:

Hello Java!

This is the simplest working structure of a Java program.

Understanding this structure is critical.
Because no matter how advanced your Java project becomes,
it will always follow this basic syntax foundation.

And that is Java Basic Syntax.