In this slide, we are going to talk about an important concept in Java programming: Identifiers.

Identifiers are the names given to Java elements such as classes, variables, and methods.
Whenever we create something in Java and assign it a name, that name is called an identifier.

For example, when we create a variable, we give it a name.
When we define a class, we give it a name.
When we write a method, we assign it a name.
All of these names are identifiers.

However, Java has specific rules for creating identifiers.

First, an identifier must start with a letter, a dollar sign, or an underscore.
It cannot start with a number.

Second, after the first character, any combination of letters, digits, underscores, or dollar signs is allowed.

Third, reserved keywords cannot be used as identifiers.
Words like int, class, public, and static already have predefined meanings in Java.
Because of that, they cannot be used as variable or method names.

Fourth, Java is case-sensitive.
This means that “age” and “Age” are considered completely different identifiers.

Fifth, names should be meaningful and readable.
Writing code is not just about making it work — it is also about making it understandable.
Good identifier names improve code clarity and maintainability.

Now let’s look at some examples.

int age = 25;
Here, “age” is a valid identifier.

double $salary = 5000;
Starting with a dollar sign is allowed, so this is valid.

int _value = 10;
An identifier can also start with an underscore.

int __1_value = 20;
Since it starts with an underscore, it is valid.

Now let’s look at illegal examples.

int 123abc;
An identifier cannot begin with a digit.

int -salary;
The minus sign is not allowed in identifiers, so this is invalid.

Let’s think about how Java processes identifiers.

A name is declared.
Java checks the first character.
Then it checks whether the name is a reserved keyword.
If all rules are satisfied, a valid identifier is created.
And then it can be used throughout the program.

In conclusion, identifiers are fundamental building blocks of a program.
Choosing good names is a sign of professional software development.

Remember, clean code is not just code that runs —
it is code that communicates clearly.