In this slide we are going to talk about the Java Development Workflow.

Once Java is installed and your environment is fully set up, development follows a very clear and logical cycle. This cycle is simple, but it is extremely powerful, and it is how real-world Java software is built.

First, we write the program.

Everything starts with writing code. We create a .java file and define our class. For example, here we have a simple Calculator class. Inside it, we define the main method, which is the entry point of every Java application.

In this example, we declare an integer variable called sum, assign it the value of 5 + 7, and then print the result using System.out.println.

This is the writing phase. Just plain source code. Nothing has been executed yet.

Second step: Compile the program.

Java is a compiled language. That means the source code we write cannot run directly. It must first be translated into bytecode.

We use the javac command for this.

When we run:

javac Calculator.java

The Java compiler checks for syntax errors and converts the source file into a .class file. This .class file contains Java bytecode, which can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine.

If there is a mistake in the code, the compiler will stop and show error messages. At this point, we go back and fix the code.

Third step: Run the program.

After successful compilation, we execute the program using the java command:

java Calculator

Now the JVM loads the bytecode, starts from the main method, and executes the program.

In our example, it prints:

Result: 12

Fourth step: Check the output.

We always verify whether the output matches our expectation. Did it calculate correctly? Did it print what we wanted? Is there any unexpected behavior?

This is where logical errors appear. The code may compile successfully but still produce incorrect results.

Fifth step: Fix errors if needed.

If there is a syntax error, the compiler will tell us.

If there is a logical error, we analyze the output, debug the code, and improve it.

Then what do we do?

We repeat the process.

Write.
Compile.
Run.
Check.
Fix.
Recompile.
Run again.

This development cycle is continuous.

In real-world software development, this loop happens hundreds or even thousands of times. Professional applications are built through constant iteration.

So the Java development workflow is not just about writing code once. It is about continuously improving it through a structured cycle.

And this simple cycle — write, compile, run, debug — is the foundation of all Java software development.