In this slide, we’re focusing on Java Version Management.

When working as a developer, especially in professional environments, it’s very common to have multiple Java versions installed on the same machine.

For example:

You might have Java 17 as an LTS version.
Java 21 as the latest LTS release.
And possibly an older legacy version like Java 8 for maintaining older systems.

Different projects require different Java versions.

And if these versions are not managed properly, serious problems can occur.

PATH conflicts may happen.
The wrong JDK might compile your project.
Build tools like Maven or Gradle can fail unexpectedly.
Your IDE might behave inconsistently.

All of this happens because the system doesn’t automatically know which Java version your project needs.

It depends on two critical configurations:

JAVA_HOME
and
PATH

JAVA_HOME defines which JDK directory is considered active.

PATH determines which Java executable runs when you type:

java -version
or
javac -version

So the first step is always verification.

Check the current active version:

java -version
javac -version

Then check which JAVA_HOME is currently set.

On Windows:

echo %JAVA_HOME%

On Linux or macOS:

echo $JAVA_HOME

If the output does not match the JDK you intend to use, you need to switch it.

Next, locate your installed JDK folders.

For example:

Java 17 might be installed in a directory like
jdk-17

Java 21 might be in
jdk-21

After identifying the correct folder, update JAVA_HOME to point to that directory.

Then update your PATH to include:

JAVA_HOME/bin

Restart your terminal.

And verify again using:

java -version
javac -version

If the version now matches your target JDK, the switch was successful.

Proper Java version management prevents build inconsistencies, dependency conflicts, and unexpected deployment errors.

It ensures that the correct compiler is used, the correct runtime is active, and your development environment stays stable.

Because managing versions correctly is not just configuration work.

It’s part of being a professional developer who understands how the environment truly works.