When you decide to start learning Java,
most people think the first step is writing code.

But actually… it’s not.

The real first step is installing Java correctly.

And this is where many beginners make silent mistakes —
because they think there is only one “Java”.

But there isn’t.

There are different distributions, different versions, and different installation approaches.
And choosing the right one can save you from serious compatibility and stability problems later.

So let’s break this down step by step.

First, let’s talk about Java distributions.

You’ll usually hear two main names:

Oracle JDK
and
OpenJDK.

Oracle JDK is the official distribution provided by Oracle.
It’s widely used in enterprise environments and comes with commercial support options.

OpenJDK, on the other hand, is the open-source implementation of Java.
It is free, community-driven, and used by most developers today.

Now here’s something important.

From a technical perspective, modern Oracle JDK and OpenJDK versions are almost identical in core functionality.
For most developers — especially students and independent developers — OpenJDK is completely sufficient.

Now let’s talk about versions.

You’ll hear terms like LTS and Non-LTS.

LTS stands for Long Term Support.

Examples are Java 17 and Java 21.

These versions receive long-term updates, security patches, and stability improvements.
If you are building a serious project, working in a company, or planning something long-term —
you should choose an LTS version.

Non-LTS versions are released more frequently.
They include newer experimental features,
but they are supported for a shorter period.

So unless you specifically need the newest features,
LTS is the safe and recommended choice.

Now let’s move to the installation process itself.

The process is actually structured and simple.

First — choose your version.
Second — download the distribution.
Third — install the JDK.
Fourth — set the JAVA_HOME environment variable.
Fifth — update your PATH variable.
And finally — verify the installation.

This verification step is critical.

On Windows, you can open Command Prompt and type:

where java
where javac

On Linux or macOS, you type:

which java
which javac

And to check the installed version in detail, you run:

java -version
javac -version

If you see version information printed in the terminal —
your installation is successful.

If not,
the problem is usually related to environment variables.

And this is why understanding JAVA_HOME and PATH is important.

Because Java doesn’t just need to be installed —
it needs to be accessible by your system globally.

So when someone says
“Java is not recognized as an internal or external command” —
that’s not a Java problem.

That’s an environment configuration problem.

And once you understand this structure,
Java installation stops being something confusing.

It becomes a predictable system.

Choose the right distribution.
Pick an LTS version.
Install properly.
Configure environment variables.
Verify everything.

And once that foundation is solid,
you’re ready to start building.

Because professional development doesn’t begin with writing code.

It begins with setting up the right environment.

And Java — as always — rewards those who understand the fundamentals first.