Alright guys In our previous slide, we unlocked the fundamental difference between primitive and reference assignments. But now, we are going to dive much deeper into advanced memory management. We are looking at Memory & Object States. Specifically, we will answer two critical questions: How does Java manage memory cleanup automatically? And how can we lock an object in memory using the final keyword? Understanding these mechanics is what separates intermediate developers from true Java masters, allowing you to optimize RAM usage and avoid devastating memory leaks.
Let’s start on the left side with our first major concept: Mutating versus Reassigning. This is a distinction that trips up many developers. When we talk about Mutating an object, we mean changing its internal data (like saying arr[0] = 5;). During mutation, the memory address stays exactly the same. However, Reassigning means taking that variable and pointing it to a completely new object (such as arr = new int[]{1, 2};). When you reassign, the variable abandons its old memory address and hops to a new one.
This brings us to our second concept: The null Assignment and Garbage Collection. In Java, when you assign null to a reference variable, you are telling Java to completely sever the connection between that variable and its object in memory. Now, here is how Java keeps its memory clean: if an object in heap memory has absolutely zero variables pointing to it, it becomes orphan data. Java’s automatic Garbage Collector (GC) will eventually detect this, delete the object, and free up that RAM.
Our third concept is The final Reference Trap. Many developers think that marking a reference variable as final makes the entire object completely unchangeable. That is a myth! If a reference variable is final, you cannot reassign it to a different memory address using =. However, the object itself is not locked; you are still completely free to mutate and modify its internal data.
To see how this works in real-time, let’s track the memory states in our middle diagram. In Action 1, we declare int[] x = {100};. Our variable x now points directly to a slot in Heap Memory containing {100}.
In Action 2, we execute int[] y = x;. This copies the reference address, so both variables, x and y, are now pointing to the exact same Heap Memory slot. They share the data.
In Action 3, we say x = null;. This cuts the link for x, leaving x completely empty. But notice what happens to the data: because y is still pointing to {100}, the data survives! It is not eligible for Garbage Collection yet, because it still has an active reference.
Let’s prove these concepts in our actual code block on the far right. In Test Case 1, Surviving Null, we have int[] dataA = { 50 }; and int[] dataB = dataA;. We then write dataA = null; to cut A's connection. When we print dataB[0], does it crash? Absolutely not! The output is a solid 50 because dataB preserved the memory link.
In Test Case 2, Final Reference, we declare a final StringBuilder text = new StringBuilder("A");. On the next line, we try to reassign it: text = new StringBuilder("B");. This immediately throws a compile-time ERROR because Java refuses to let a final reference point to a new memory address. However, on the next line, we write text.append("B");. This succeeds perfectly! We mutated the internal state of the string builder. When we print the final result, we get AB, proving that final locks the memory pointer, not the object's contents. Master these object states and garbage collection rules, and you will write rock-solid, highly optimized Java applications. See you in the next slide!